.. Copyright © 2015-2018 the contributors (see Contributors.md).

   This file is part of Knora.

   Knora is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
   it under the terms of the GNU Affero General Public License as published
   by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
   (at your option) any later version.

   Knora is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
   but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
   MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
   GNU Affero General Public License for more details.

   You should have received a copy of the GNU Affero General Public
   License along with Knora.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

********************
v1.1.0 Release Notes
********************

See the `release`_ on Github.


Required changes to existing data:
----------------------------------


1. Project ontologies property changed:
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``knora-base:projectOntologyGraph`` needs to be renamed to ``knora-base:projectOntology``. Also before it
was a ``xsd:string``, where now it needs to be an IRI. The graph where the ontology is stored will need to have
the same name.


2. Project data graph property removed:
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The property ``knora-base:projectDataGraph`` needs to be removed.


2. Project shortcode property added:
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``knora-base:projectShortcode`` property was added. When adding a project shortcode, we also need to update:

1. the IRI of the project to: ``http://rdfh.ch/projects/[shortcode]``
2. the IRIs all project ontologies to: ``http://www.knora.org/ontology/[shortcode]/[ontoname]``
3. the IRIs of lists to: ``http://rdfh.ch/lists/[shortcode]/[UUID]``
4. the IRIs of groups to: ``http://rdfh.ch/groups/[shortcode]/[UUID]``

New features:
-------------

Bugfixes:
---------


.. _release: https://github.com/dhlab-basel/Knora/releases/tag/v1.1.0