.. Copyright © 2015 Lukas Rosenthaler, Benjamin Geer, Ivan Subotic,
   Tobias Schweizer, André Kilchenmann, and Sepideh Alassi.

   This file is part of Knora.

   Knora is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
   it under the terms of the GNU Affero General Public License as published
   by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
   (at your option) any later version.

   Knora is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
   but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
   MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
   GNU Affero General Public License for more details.

   You should have received a copy of the GNU Affero General Public
   License along with Knora.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

********************
v1.2.0 Release Notes
********************

See the `release`_ and closed tickets on the `v1.2.0 milestone`_ on Github.


Required changes to existing data:
----------------------------------

1. Project keywords (admin data)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Project keywords need to be transformed into sequences and property changed to `projectKeyword` (singular).

before:

::

  <http://rdfh.ch/projects/00FF>
          knora-base:projectKeywords "images, collection"^^xsd:string .


after:

::

  <http://rdfh.ch/projects/00FF>
          knora-base:projectKeyword "images"^^xsd:string, "collection"^^xsd:string ;


2. Project descriptions (admin data)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Project descriptions need to be transformed into sequences with language tag.

before:

::

  <http://rdfh.ch/projects/00FF>
          knora-base:projectDescription "A demo project of a collection of images"^^xsd:string .


after:

::

  <http://rdfh.ch/projects/00FF>
          knora-base:projectDescription "A demo project of a collection of images"@en .

3. salsah-gui:guiOrder
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The predicate ``salsah-gui:guiOrder`` is now attached to cardinalities in class definitions, instead of
attaching it to property definitions. This allows the same property to be first in one class and last in
another class.

Before:

::

  :title rdf:type owl:ObjectProperty ;
    salsah-gui:guiOrder "1"^^xsd:integer .


After:

::

  :book rdf:type owl:Class ;
        rdfs:subClassOf knora-base:Resource ,
                        [
                           rdf:type owl:Restriction ;
                           owl:onProperty :title ;
                           owl:minCardinality "1"^^xsd:nonNegativeInteger ;
                           salsah-gui:guiOrder "1"^^xsd:nonNegativeInteger
                        ]

Existing project-specific ontologies must be updated. You can use the command-line tool
``org/knora/webapi/util/TransformOntology.scala`` to do this automatically. First dump your
ontology to a Turtle file. Then at the ``sbt`` console, type:

::

   runMain org.knora.webapi.util.TransformOntology -t guiorder INPUT OUTPUT

For INPUT, use the absolute path of the Turtle file representing your existing ontology. For
OUTPUT, use the absolute path of the output file to be created.

Note that, because of a limitation of the current version of the RDF4J Turtle generation
library, the generated Turtle represents cardinalities as labelled blank nodes, rather than
as anonymous blank nodes, which would be more readable
(see `this pull request <https://github.com/eclipse/rdf4j/pull/890>`_).

Then replace the contents of your ontology's named graph in the triplestore with the contents
of the transformed Turtle file, and restart the Knora API server. Be sure to test this on a test
installation using a copy of your data and ontologies, before updating the ontology used by a
live server.

Also, you have to replace the `salsah-gui` ontology that you have in the triplestore with the one
in `salsah-gui.ttl`.


New features:
-------------

- General
    - Change: Return differently formatted JSON responses for exception messages, depending on which route (``v1``, ``v2``` or ``admin``) was accessed.

- Admin API
    - Change: Project shortcode is required for the creation of new projects
    - Change: Project keywords are now a sequence. Needs change to existing data. Please see example above.
    - Change: Project description has language tag and is returned as array. Needs change to existing data. Please see example above.
    - Change: Remove institution from project (will be added later with the FAIR metadata)
    - Change: Sorting of collections with admin objects (user, group, project)
    - New: Keywords endpoint at ``/admin/projects/keywords`` returns all unique keywords (as strings) for all projects in an array
    - New: Keywords endpoint at ``/admin/projects/keywords/[projectIri]`` returns all keywords of a single project.
    - New: Lists endpoint at ``/admin/lists/`` allows new lists to be created.
    - New: Lists endpoint at ``/admin/lists/infos/<listIri>`` allows to change basic list information.




Bugfixes:
---------

.. _release: https://github.com/dhlab-basel/Knora/releases/tag/v1.2.0
.. _v1.2.0 milestone: https://github.com/dhlab-basel/Knora/milestone/6