.. Copyright © 2015-2018 the contributors (see Contributors.md).

   This file is part of Knora.

   Knora is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
   it under the terms of the GNU Affero General Public License as published
   by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
   (at your option) any later version.

   Knora is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
   but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
   MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
   GNU Affero General Public License for more details.

   You should have received a copy of the GNU Affero General Public
   License along with Knora.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

********************
v1.3.0 Release Notes
********************

See the `release`_ and closed tickets on the `v1.3.0 milestone`_ on Github.


Required changes to existing data:
----------------------------------

1. Replace salsah-gui ontology
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You must replace the ``salsah-gui`` ontology that you have in the triplestore with the one
in ``salsah-gui.ttl``.

New features:
-------------

- More support for salsah-gui elements and attributes in ontologies
  - Serve the ``salsah-gui`` ontology in API v2 in the default schema.
  - Show ``salsah-gui:guiElement`` and ``salsah-gui:guiAttribute`` when serving ontologies in API v2 in the default schema.
  - Allow ``salsah-gui:guiElement`` and ``salsah-gui:guiAttribute`` to be included in new property definitions created via API v2.
  - Change ``salsah-gui`` so that GraphDB's consistency checker can check the use of ``guiElement`` and ``guiAttribute``.

- Changes to ``application.conf``. The ``sipi`` and ``web-api`` sections have received a big update, adding separate settings
  for internal and external host settings:

::

    app {
        knora-api {
            // relevant for direct communication inside the knora stack
            internal-host = "0.0.0.0"
            internal-port = 3333

            // relevant for the client, i.e. browser
            external-protocol = "http" // optional ssl termination needs to be done by the proxy
            external-host = "0.0.0.0"
            external-port = 3333
        }

        sipi {
            // relevant for direct communication inside the knora stack
            internal-protocol = "http"
            internal-host = "localhost"
            internal-port = 1024

            // relevant for the client, i.e. browser
            external-protocol = "http"
            external-host = "localhost"
            external-port = 1024

            prefix = "knora"
            file-server-path = "server"
            path-conversion-route = "convert_from_binaries"
            file-conversion-route = "convert_from_file"
            image-mime-types = ["image/tiff", "image/jpeg", "image/png", "image/jp2"]
            movie-mime-types = []
            sound-mime-types = []
        }

        salsah1 {
            base-url = "http://localhost:3335/"
            project-icons-basepath = "project-icons/"
        }
    }

Bugfixes:
---------

- When API v2 served ``knora-api`` (default schema), ``salsah-gui:guiElement`` and ``salsah-gui:guiAttribute`` were not shown in properties in that ontology.
- The predicate ``salsah-gui:guiOrder`` was not accepted when creating a property via API v2.

.. _release: https://github.com/dhlab-basel/Knora/releases/tag/v1.3.0
.. _v1.3.0 milestone: https://github.com/dhlab-basel/Knora/milestone/7
