.. Copyright © 2015-2018 the contributors (see Contributors.md).

   This file is part of Knora.

   Knora is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
   it under the terms of the GNU Affero General Public License as published
   by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
   (at your option) any later version.

   Knora is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
   but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
   MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
   GNU Affero General Public License for more details.

   You should have received a copy of the GNU Affero General Public
   License along with Knora.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

***************************************
v1.4.0 Release Notes (not released yet)
***************************************

See the `release`_ and closed tickets on the `v1.4.0 milestone`_ on Github.


Required changes to existing data:
----------------------------------

- Every ontology must now have the property ``knora-base:attachedToProject``, which points to the IRI of the
  project that is responsible for the ontology. This must be added to each project-specific ontology in existing
  repositories. All built-in ontologies have been updated to have this property, and must therefore be reloaded
  into existing repositories.

  The property ``knora-base:projectOntology`` has been removed, and must be removed from project
  definitions in existing repositories.

- Every project now needs to have the property ``knora-base:projectShortcode`` set.



New features:
-------------

- A project-specific ontology can now be deleted via API v2.
- Added OpenAPI / Swagger API documentation route
- The Knora API server now checks the validity of ontologies on startup.
- The property ``knora-base:projectShortcode`` is now a required property (was optional).

Bugfixes:
---------

- API v1 extended search was not properly handling multiple conditions on list values (issue #800)
- Fix image orientation in SALSAH 1 (issue #726)

.. _release: https://github.com/dhlab-basel/Knora/releases/tag/v1.4.0
.. _v1.4.0 milestone: https://github.com/dhlab-basel/Knora/milestone/8
